in cryptography, a substitution cipher is a method of encoding by which units of plaintext are replaced with ciphertext, according to a regular system; the "units" may be single letters (the most common), pairs of letters, triplets of letters, mixtures of the above, and so forth. the receiver deciphers the text by performing an inverse substitution.

substitution ciphers can be compared with transposition ciphers. in a transposition cipher, the units of the plaintext are rearranged in a different and usually quite complex order, but the units themselves are left unchanged. by contrast, in a substitution cipher, the units of the plaintext are retained in the same sequence in the ciphertext, but the units themselves are altered.

there are a number of different types of substitution cipher. if the cipher operates on single letters, it is termed a simple substitution cipher; a cipher that operates on larger groups of letters is termed polygraphic. a monoalphabetic cipher uses fixed substitution over the entire message, whereas a polyalphabetic cipher uses a number of substitutions at different positions in the message, where a unit from the plaintext is mapped to one of several possibilities in the ciphertext and vice versa.

the method used as an aid to breaking classical ciphers is frequency analysis, or the study of the frequency of letters or groups of letters in a ciphertext. frequency analysis is based on the fact that, in any given stretch of written language, certain letters and combinations of letters occur with varying frequencies. moreover, there is a characteristic distribution of letters that is roughly the same for almost all samples of that language. for instance, given a section of english language, e, t, a and o are the most common, while z, q and x are rare. 

even though the goal has been the same, the methods and techniques of cryptanalysis have changed drastically through the history of cryptography, adapting to increasing cryptographic complexity, ranging from the pen-and-paper methods of the past, through machines like bombes and colossus computers at bletchley park in world war ii, to the mathematically advanced computerized schemes of the present. methods for breaking modern cryptosystems often involve solving carefully constructed problems in pure mathematics, the best-known being integer factorization.

successful cryptanalysis has undoubtedly influenced history; the ability to read the presumed-secret thoughts and plans of others can be a decisive advantage. for example, mary, queen of scots was tried and executed for treason as a result of her involvement in three plots to assassinate elizabeth i of england. the plans came to light after her coded correspondence with fellow conspirators was deciphered by thomas phelippes.

if you deciphered the above text, then know that the third challenge will be written in english and will contain the word cryptography.

fmaxdzhwerzhqaqeobxpxyxsah